The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of A visit to the Bazaar, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A visit to the Bazaar

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 19, 2023 [eBook #70595]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Typographical errors were silently corrected.

 2. Table of Contents, not appearing in original, is added

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,

    (a) Italics are indicated thus _italic_;

    (b) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

 4. UCLA catalog listing states: Local Notes Spec. Coll. copy:
    Contains duplicate plates of "Grocer," and is lacking the
    plate "Fancy Works."

                  *       *       *       *       *


                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR.

                     [Illustration: _Bookseller_

  _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]




                               A VISIT

                                 TO

                             THE BAZAAR:


                          BY THE AUTHOR OF

            _JULIET, OR THE REWARD OF FILIAL AFFECTION_;

               _AND THE PORT FOLIO OF A SCHOOL GIRL_.


                         THE THIRD EDITION.

                              _LONDON_:

                     PRINTED FOR HARRIS AND SON,

                  CORNER OF ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD;

               AND MAY ALSO BE HAD AT SEVERAL SHOPS IN

                      THE BAZAAR, SOHO SQUARE.

                                1820.




       H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.




                              CONTENTS.

 Chapter                                                          Page

 THE BAZAAR                                                         08
 THE JEWELLER                                                       20
 LINEN DRAPER'S                                                     27
 TOY SHOP                                                           33
 PASTRY COOK'S                                                      36
 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                                40
 MUSIC SELLER                                                       46
 HATTER                                                             49
 LACE MAN                                                           53
 OPTICIAN'S                                                         57
 UMBRELLA                                                           63
 WORK BASKETS                                                       66
 WORK TRUNK MAKER                                                   71
 ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS                                                 73
 SWEET SINGING BIRDS                                                77
 ENGLISH CHINA                                                      83
 HAIR MERCHANT                                                      87
 SHOE MAKER                                                         89
 GUN SMITH                                                          92
 GREEN-HOUSES                                                       99
 MILLINER                                                          103
 CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST                                              106
 PRINTS                                                            113
 FANCY WORKS                                                       117
 GROCER'S                                                          120
 FURRIER                                                           125
 DRESS MAKER'S                                                     130
 BRUSH MAKER'S                                                     133
 BOOKSELLER                                                        135
 WATCH MAKER                                                       140
 FRUITERER'S                                                       146
 THE HOSIER'S                                                      149
 SCULPTOR                                                          155
 FINIS                                                             160




                                 THE

                               BAZAAR.


"My dear," said Mrs. Durnford to her husband on his return from a long
walk, "I this morning received a letter from poor Susan Boscawen,
full of the most lively expressions of her gratitude, for the kind
assistance which you gave to her on the death of her father. She has
established herself at the Bazaar, in Soho-square, which I understand
is a most respectable institution, founded by a gentleman of
considerable opulence residing in the place, and by this means, she is
enabled to support her aged mother and her two helpless brothers. The
one you know is a cripple, and the other was born blind. If you have
no objection, I should like to take the children to town some morning,
when it would be convenient to you to accompany us, and shew them the
interior of our English Bazaar."

"Name your day and I will attend you," replied Mr. Durnford. "The sight
will be both novel and pleasing to the children, and I shall feel
myself particularly delighted in beholding the amiable Susan, placed in
a situation of safety and emolument."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, a fine boy about ten years of age, "what
is the meaning of the word Bazaar?"

"My dear boy," replied Mr. Durnford, "the term Bazaar is given by the
Turks and Persians to a kind of Market or Exchange, some of which are
extremely magnificent; that of Ispahan, in Persia, surpasses all the
other European exchanges, and yet that of Taurus exceeds it in size.
There is the old and the new Bazaar at Constantinople, the former is
chiefly for arms, and the latter for different articles belonging
to goldsmiths, jewellers, furriers, and various other manufactures.
Our Bazaar in Soho-square, was founded by Mr. Trotter, on premises
originally occupied by the store-keeper general, consisting of
several rooms which are conveniently fitted up with handsome mahogany
counters, extending not only round the sides, but in the lower and
upper apartments, forming a parallelogram in the middle. These
counters, having at proper distances flaps or falling doors, are
in contiguity with each other, but are respectively distinguished
by a small groove at a distance of every four feet of counter, the
pannels of which are numbered with conspicuous figures, and these are
let upon moderate terms to females who can bring forward sufficient
testimonies of their moral respectability."

"It appears to me to be a most excellent establishment," said Mrs.
Durnford, "as it enables many a worthy female to dispose of the produce
of her labours, without incurring the risk of taking a shop which might
prove unsuccessful, and thus she would not only be drained of every
sixpence she possessed, but she might be reduced to actual beggary from
the failure of her first attempt."

"True, my dear," replied Mr. Durnford, "such is too frequently the
case. But in this institution no such danger can arise. The person
who from strong recommendation obtains a counter in our Bazaar, pays
daily, three-pence for every foot in length, and is not required to
hold her situation more than from day to day. I have been told, that
at present, there are upwards of a hundred females who are employed
in these rooms, and a more pleasing and novel effect can hardly be
imagined, than is here produced by the sight of these elegant little
shops, filled with every species of light goods, works of art, and
female ingenuity in general."

"Then you have seen the Bazaar, papa?" said Maria, the eldest daughter
of Mr. Durnford.

"Yes, my love," replied her father, "I went over it about five weeks
ago with Lady Bellenden, who has placed two very amiable young women
there, both of whom are the orphan daughters of a country curate, one
of them has a counter for all sorts of painted ornaments, the other
for fine needle work. But you shall see the Bazaar yourself, Maria,
and if your mother is disengaged, I think we will set out to-morrow
morning, immediately after breakfast. We shall then have plenty of
time to examine the contents of the Bazaar, and return in time to
receive our guests for dinner."

To the inexpressible delight of all the children, Mrs. Durnford
immediately assented to the proposal of her husband, and it was
agreed, that as the young people had behaved themselves lately much
to the satisfaction of their parents, they should all of them enjoy
the pleasure of a "visit to the Bazaar," except the baby in arms,
and the youngest boy.

Early the next morning Mr. and Mrs. Durnford, with Maria and Emily,
who were twins, and just turned of twelve years of age, and Caroline,
a sweet little girl about seven, accompanied by Theodore, proceeded
with light hearts and buoyant spirits to town, which was only two
miles from the residence of their father, a gentleman of large
independent fortune. They had frequently visited the metropolis, had
been once to a play, and had seen several other places worthy of
their inspection, but they all felt their curiosity strongly excited
to view the Bazaar, as well as to behold once more Susan Boscawen,
who was a daughter of a deceased tradesman, long a resident in this
village, and for whom they all entertained a sincere regard.

On arriving at the place of their destination, the young people were
surprized to see the square filled with elegant equipages, some of
them belonging to our first nobility. "I believe, my dears," said
Mr. Durnford, "that this is the first time any of you have seen
Soho-square."

"Yes, papa, it is," cried Theodore, "pray whose statue is that which I
see placed in the centre of that large area, and what are those figures
at the feet of the statue."

"It is, as you may observe, a pedestrian statue of King Charles
the Second," replied Mr. Durnford, "and those wretched mutilated
figures are emblematical of the rivers, Thames, Trent, Severn, and
the Humber. The Square was formerly called King-square, and I believe
some efforts have been made to have that name revived. It has been
greatly altered since the original disposition of the ground: then
a fountain of four streams fell into a basin in the centre; where
now stands the worn out statue of King Charles. It was once also
called Monmouth-square, the Duke of Monmouth then residing in the
second house; and tradition says, that on the death of the Duke, his
admirers changed it to Soho, being the word of the day at the
battle of Sedgemoor. The name of the unfortunate Duke is, however,
still preserved in that of Monmouth-street, long celebrated for
old shops, old clothes, and shop cellars. That house, my dears, is
celebrated as being the residence of the venerable and worthy Sir
Joseph Banks, whose whole life has been devoted to science, and the
diffusion of every branch of useful knowledge."


                             THE JEWELLER.

                      [Illustration: _Jeweller_]

They now walked towards the Bazaar, and in a few minutes entered the
first room, which is sixty-two feet long, and thirty-six broad. The
walls were hung with red cloth, and at the ends were large mirrors
which reflected the surrounding objects.

"Oh, dear mamma!" exclaimed Emily, "let us stop a moment to look at
these beautiful ornaments, what a pretty gold cross and pearl chain; I
should like to buy it for baby, only that it would come to more than
all my pocket money."

"I think, papa," said Maria, "that I have read that pearls come chiefly
from Ceylon, and are taken from a particular species of oyster."

"You are right, my love," replied Mr. Durnford, "there are too
seasons for pearl fishing. The first is in March and April, and
the last in August and September, and the more rain there falls
in the year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. The method of
procuring the pearls is rather singular. The diver binds a stone six
inches thick, and a foot long under his body; which serves him as
ballast, prevents his being driven away by the motion of the water,
and enables him to walk steadily under the waves. They also tie a
very heavy stone to one foot, by which they are speedily sent to
the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are firmly fastened to
the rocks, they arm their hands with leather mittens, to prevent
their being bruised in pulling the oysters violently off. Each diver
carries down with him a large net, tied to his neck by a long cord,
the other end of which is fastened to the side of his bark. The net
is to hold the oysters, and the cord to pull up the diver when his
bag is full. Thus equipped, he sometimes flings himself sixty feet
under water, and when he arrives at the bottom, he runs from side to
side, tearing up all the oysters he can meet with, and puts them into
his net as expeditiously as possible."

"Oh, papa! how frightened I should be of the enormous great fishes,"
said Caroline.

"They are certainly to be dreaded, my love, but the diver no sooner
perceives one of them approaching, than he pulls his cord, and the
signal is attended to immediately by those above. Look, Emily, at this
diamond, can you tell me from whence they come?"

"I believe from the East Indies, papa, and South America."

"Yes, my dear. This object of human vanity was formerly called Adamant,
being the hardest body in nature. In the East Indies, there are also
two rivers, in the sands of which are diamonds. The miners frequently
dig through rocks, till they come to a sort of mineral earth, in which
the diamonds are enclosed, and to prevent their concealing any of
them they are obliged to go naked. The largest diamond ever known to
have been found, was that in the possession of the Great Mogul, which
weighed two hundred and seventy-nine carats, each carat being four
grains."

"Diamonds are beautiful, and so are all the precious stones, but
they are too dear for me at present," said Theodore; "but with your
leave, papa, I should like to buy each of my sisters a little gold
heart to wear with their gold chains."

The hearts and some other trifling ornaments were accordingly selected;
and they next stopped to look at the contents of a


                           LINEN DRAPER'S

                   [Illustration: _Linen Draper_]

counter. Maria called the attention of Emily to a short fat coarse
looking woman, who was enquiring the price of some muslin which
the owner was shewing her. "Five shillings a yard!" said she, in a
shrill voice, at the same time enlarging her eyes and stretching out
her hand, "Why, I can buy as good as this at any shop for three.
Surely you must take me for a ninny, to ask so much money for your
muslin." So saying, away she walked highly offended, although the
article which she had rejected was offered to her at its fair price.

Mrs. Durnford desired to look at some Cambric, and while the man was
searching for it, she asked Caroline if she remembered from what
country the finest was imported. The little girl hesitated, and her
mamma requested Maria to give her the necessary information. "Cambric
is made in several parts of France and Flanders," said Miss Durnford.
"That from Cambray is, however, esteemed the best. We imitate it in
Scotland, but have not brought it to the perfection of the foreign
Cambric."

"Very well! Maria," said her father, "I am pleased to find that you
remember so well what you are told, and now Emily, can you inform me
what that fine cloth is made of, which your mother has just bought for
your brother's shirts?" "It is made of flax, papa, which in Latin is
_linum_, from whence the word linen and _linon_ is derived."

"You are a good girl," said Mr. Durnford, "and I mean to reward each
of you according to the knowledge which you display during our visit
to the Bazaar. Flax grows in many parts of England, and still more in
Scotland and Ireland. When fit to gather, it is taken by the flax
dressers, who pass it through water, strip the slender stalks of the
rind; and then it becomes fit to split, and again undergoes a process
to prepare it for the wheel. It is then spun into thread, more or
less fine according to the purpose it is intended for. The very
finest is as minute as the smallest hair, and is used by the lace
makers. That is, of course, a very fine sort of which the Cambric is
made. It is a singular thing that the Romans, who in consequence of
their extensive conquests, became the most luxurious people on earth,
never discovered the art of making linen from flax, or hemp, which is
a coarser plant of the same kind. Their cloathing, though extremely
magnificent, being embroidered with purple, and often with gold,
was woven only of wool, and Voltaire, a celebrated French writer,
makes Tullia, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of Cicero, the
greatest orator the world ever saw, admire the superior elegance of
the toilet of an English lady. They had neither stockings nor linen,
for which we should think the finery of their sandals attached with
gold cords, or their embroidered vests fastened with diamond lockets,
made but a poor compensation."

"Oh! what a beautiful shawl, papa," cried Caroline, "I wish my sisters
had each one."

"That is very expensive, my sweet girl," said her father, "it is made
of the fine wool of the Angora goat, a native of the warm regions of
the earth, and is manufactured in India. We vainly attempt to imitate
them here, but cannot succeed. But come, let us turn to the


                               TOY SHOP,

                      [Illustration: _Toy Shop_]

as I perceive that your mamma has concluded her purchases."

They now advanced towards the counter, before which some children were
standing. A fine little boy, the picture of health and happiness, was
delighting himself with a cart, while his elder brother, with a less
satisfied look, was listening to the advice of his sister. "I want that
drum, and I will have it, Sophy, you know I may buy what I like."

"Yes, my dear Charles," replied his sister, mildly, "but pray do not
buy the drum, as it will increase poor mamma's bad headache."

"Don't have it, Charles," cried a pretty rosy cheeked little girl,
"don't have it, if Sophy says not. You know I mean to lay out my money
just as she pleases."

"So you may," said Charles, grumblingly, "but I shall lay out mine as I
please, and the drum I will have."

The drum was accordingly handed over to the young gentleman, and
when his sisters had bought their toys, they gave them to a female
attendant, and moved onward.

"What a disagreeable rude boy that was," remarked Caroline, "how unlike
his sisters."

"Quite so, my dear," said Mrs. Durnford, "I am afraid he is badly
managed at home, and that, joined to a bad disposition, will make him
a very unamiable character as he grows up. He should have listened to
the gentle advice of his eldest sister, who from her dutiful attention
to the health and tranquillity of her mother, gave evident proofs of a
kind and feeling heart."

Theodore and his sisters now selected a variety of toys as well for
themselves as for their little brother, William. A composition doll
was bought for the baby, and a very pretty white dog with a gilt
collar round its neck. The young ladies had each a curious puzzle,
and Caroline took a fancy to an ass with its panniers loaded with
vegetables. This toy her papa gave her, as well as a nice painted box
full of sheep, trees, shepherd's hut, and a shepherd and his dog,
telling her at the same time, that most of those kind of toys came
from Holland, and that they were sold here much cheaper than we could
make them.

They next stopped at the


                           PASTRY COOK'S,

                   [Illustration: _Pastry Cook_]

where a young lady was eating a jelly, and laughing archly at a little
boy who greedily endeavoured to force a whole cake into his mouth at
once.

"Why, you silly little fellow," said she, "what are you stretching
your mouth so wide for? Why don't you eat it properly. You might
choke yourself if you did get it all in at once. Bite a piece off,
and don't do as you did the other evening at tea, fill your mouth so
full that you would have been suffocated, had not Sally relieved you
by turning out the toast as fast as you had put it in."

"Dear mamma," said Caroline in a low voice, "what a sad thing is
greediness. I dare say that little boy would not give his sister a
morsel for all the world, and I should not enjoy the finest thing that
ever was made, unless my brothers and sisters shared it with me."

"That I will answer for, Caroline," replied her mother. "And now my
dear children take whatever you please, as it is necessary that you
should have some refreshment after your walk."

The attention of the young people was now drawn towards a counter of


                        MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,

               [Illustration: _Musical Instruments_]

at which a young lady was trying the tones of a Guitar, while her
brother ran his lips over a Syrinx. Theodore told his father that he
should like to have one. "Your wish shall be gratified," replied Mr.
Durnford, "provided that you can tell me the origin of its being so
called."

"I think," said Theodore, "that the god Pan fell in love with a
nymph called Syrinx, in the train of Diana, who, when pursued by Pan
fled for refuge to the river Ladon, her father, who changed her into
a reed. Pan observing that the reeds, when agitated by the wind,
produced a pleasing sound, connected some of them together, and
formed them into a rural pipe, and named it Syrinx."

"Have the goodness to hand me over that Syrinx," said Mr. Durnford,
"this young gentleman has won it, by being able to account for the
cause of its bearing that name." He now presented it to his delighted
son, who received it with a double pleasure, as it was accompanied by
the praise of his beloved father, and the smiles of his equally beloved
mother. A couple of Tambourines were ordered to be sent home for Maria
and Emily, and a triangle for Caroline, and they next proceeded to the


                             MUSIC SELLER,

                    [Illustration: _Music Seller_]

to examine the contents of his collection.

This did not occupy much of their time, as the two eldest young ladies,
who were tolerably advanced in music, had a large assortment at home,
part of which had belonged to their mother when a girl. Mrs. Durnford,
however, purchased some pretty airs for the piano, and a few of Moore's
sacred songs, which she knew were extremely beautiful; and which she
wished Maria and Emily to learn, that they might sing them to their
grandpapa, when he next paid them a visit. She was just quitting
the counter, when Caroline burst into a loud laugh, pointing to the
opposite counter, which was occupied by a


                                HATTER,

                       [Illustration: _Hatter_]

Mrs. Durnford instantly saw the cause of her risibility, and though
a smile, which she could not repress, dimpled her face, yet she
cautioned her little girl not to give way again to her demonstrations
of merriment in so public a manner, especially as by so doing, she
might inadvertently wound the feelings of an individual.

The objects which had excited the laughter of Caroline, were a short
thick made vulgar looking woman, and a tall thin boy who stood as stiff
as a poker, with his hands fixed to his sides, while his mother tried
to force a hat on his head, evidently too tight for him.

"It is too little for me, mother," cried the boy, pouting out his lips
which were none of the thinnest, "and it won't do: besides, I want one
of them there new fashioned caps, which all gentlemen's sons wear now."

"And what have you to do with gentlemen's sons," said his mother,
trying to get the hat a little further on his head, "You know, Tommy,
that your father is only a tailor. He only serves gentlemen, he is no
gentleman himself. The hat is a nice hat, and a good one for the money,
so you shall have it, Tommy. No new fangled frippery for my money."

"But it won't come on my head, mother," exclaimed the boy, half crying
for vexation, because he was not to have a cap like a gentleman's son.

"I tell you what, Tommy, if you are not quiet, I'll trim your jacket
for you, better than ever your father has done, as soon as I gets
you home. Not do, why it fits you delightfully, and you look quite
spruce and handsome in it. I won't have it come any lower, spoiling
the shape of your ears. You want them to be like Sam Wilson's ears,
and they are just like the ears of an ass, because he always puts his
hat behind them."

Poor Caroline now bit her lips, and turned another way, lest she should
again offend her mamma by laughing.

"I think, papa," said Theodore, "that hats are made from the fur of
different animals, are they not?"

"Yes, my dear. The best is the beaver, but many hats are now made
of the fur of the rabbit. Emily, do you recollect to what bird we
are indebted for those fine long feathers which you see in the
regimental hats of our officers; and which are now so universally
worn by ladies in their bonnets?"

"They come from the ostrich, I believe," replied Emily.

"You are right, my love, but let us follow your mamma, who seems
inclined to purchase that beautiful veil from the


                              LACE MAN.

                     [Illustration: _Lace Shop_]

That truly elegant and costly article of a lady's dress, namely lace,
is brought to the highest perfection in Brussels, which you know is in
Flanders, and in the French provinces in general."

"But we have English lace, papa," said Miss Durnford.

"Certainly, but it is far inferior to the foreign. In Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, great quantities are made annually by the poor
people, who subsist by the sale of this article. I have seen British
lace which has been very handsome, for instance, the black as well as
the white lace gowns belonging to your mother. They will not, however,
stand a comparison with the same article of foreign manufacture."

"Pray, papa," said Theodore, "look at that tall thin old gentleman who
is standing at the


                             OPTICIAN'S,

                     [Illustration: _Optician_]

How woe begone he seems. I suppose he cannot find a pair of
spectacles to suit his dim eyes."

"And pray look at that pert young lady, who appears to be making
herself merry at the old gentleman's expence," cried Emily, "I hope she
is not his granddaughter. See how cunningly she looks through the glass
which she holds in her hand."

"She may not intend to make game of him," replied Mr. Durnford, "but
young people cannot be too cautious how they take liberties with those
who are so much their seniors. Perhaps, Maria, you can inform me, how
telescopes were first invented. The optician has got a very good sized
one on his counter."

"The invention is owing rather to chance than thought," said Miss
Durnford, modestly, "for if I remember right, the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in Zealand, playing in their father's
shop, held two glasses between their fingers at some distance from
each other, through which the weather-cock on the steeple appeared
much larger than usual, and as if near to them, but inverted.
They spoke of it to their father, who instantly thought of fixing
two glasses in brass circles, and placing them so as to be drawn
nearer or removed, by this means he found he could see objects more
distinctly."

"That happened about the year 1590;" said Mr. Durnford, "but none
of the telescopes there made were above eighteen inches long. The
celebrated Galileo, astronomer to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, improved
them; and the invention has often been ascribed to him. That was the
refracting telescope, but the reflecting telescope is the invention
of the great Sir Isaac Newton."

"I should like to have a microscope, papa," said Theodore.

"My telescope may be converted into a microscope, my dear," said
his father, "by removing the object-glass to a greater distance from
the eye-glass, as I will show you when we go home. It is generally
supposed, that we owe the invention of them to the Hollanders, and
that spectacles, so useful to the aged and the near-sighted, was
first invented by a monk of Pisa. The thermometer and barometer are
both very useful instruments. The former ascertains the degrees of
heat, and the latter the changes of the weather."

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Caroline, "only observe what an odd face that
old woman has got, who is examining with such strict attention that
nice large silk


                              UMBRELLA.

                  [Illustration: _Umbrella Maker_]

Does she not look as if she thought something might be the matter with
it? I think she had better borrow a pair of spectacles of the optician.
Let us go a little nearer, mamma, I wish I could hear her speak."

As Caroline promised to keep a guard over her risible muscles, her
mamma granted her wish of being nearer to the little old woman, who was
prying all over the nice new umbrella.

"Six and twenty shillings, Mr. Bates! why how could you think of asking
a person like me, to give you six and twenty shillings! If you will
take twenty, Mr. Bates, I will have it, though I think it looks a
little soiled."

The man assured her that he could not take less than what he had asked,
but that she might have a cotton one much cheaper.

"A cotton one, indeed! no, no, I am not so badly off, but what I can
buy a silk umbrella if I like, but I won't give that money for one.
So good morning, Mr. Bates."

"Umbrellas are a modern invention," said Mrs. Durnford, "at least
within thirty or forty years, and in the country in particular they
are very useful, but in London they are troublesome, from the number
of passengers which we meet. I think, Caroline, that you must have a
new parasol, for yours forms but a sad contrast to your sister's,
though it was bought at the same time. I think the parasol equally as
convenient, and as necessary to our comfort as the umbrella. It shades
us from the burning rays of a summer sun, and enables us to take a long
walk without being incommoded by its beams. We will now take a look at
those


                            WORK BASKETS.

                   [Illustration: _Work Baskets_]

Mark the different expression visible on the countenances of those two
little girls. See, Maria, how happy and contented that dear fat cherub
seems, with her newly purchased basket on her arm; while her sister,
not yet suited, eagerly stretches forth her hand, anxious to examine
more than she has already seen."

"Baskets are made from the osier and the willow, are they not, mamma?"
said Maria.

"Yes, my dear girl, and extremely pretty they make them by colouring
the wood, which has a pleasing effect. They have brought the art
of basket-making to great perfection. I think I must treat myself with
one to hold fruit, and another for biscuits."

"When you are suited to your mind," said Mr. Durnford, "we will next
examine the beauties of the


                          WORK TRUNK MAKER.

                 [Illustration: _Work Trunk Maker_]

Come here, Emily, and tell me the name of this ware, as it is called."

"Tunbridge, I believe, papa," said Emily. "That is the principal
place from whence all these beautiful boxes are brought to town,"
said Mr. Durnford. "Some are made of the lime-tree, and some of the
box-tree. Here you see are work boxes, cotton and netting boxes,
writing boxes, all made at Tunbridge, besides a variety of smaller
articles, all equally useful and ornamental. See, Maria, what an
excellent imitation that trunk is of tortoise shell. Pray what is the
price of it?"

"Eight shillings, Sir," replied a modest pretty looking young woman.
Mr. Durnford paid the money, and ordered it to be sent home.

"Who do you intend it for, my dear?" enquired his wife.

"For those who shall best deserve it," said Mr. Durnford.

They now stopped at a maker of


                          ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS,

                 [Illustration: _Artificial Flowers_]

the sight of which gave great pleasure to the young ladies. Here
they perceived flowers of every description, some in wreaths for the
ball-room, others for the head, and some in bunches, either for the
bonnet or the bosom.

"What can be more beautiful than this _bouquet_ of Rosebuds, Myrtle,
and Geranium, how faithful a copy from nature!" exclaimed Mrs.
Durnford, "at a little distance you would never suppose them to be
artificial. Had it been my lot to have toiled for my daily support,
I think I should have preferred this business to any other. It is a
minor sort of painting, as the different teints must all be arranged
by the hand of taste. I have seen flowers that were scented with the
perfume belonging to them, but this made them come expensive, and
they now make them with the glowing colours of nature, but without
the richness of her scent. I love to encourage humble merit, and will
therefore order a few of its productions to be sent to Ivy Cottage."

"The flowers are beautiful, mamma, but how much more beautiful are
those


                         SWEET SINGING BIRDS,"

                     [Illustration: _Bird Seller_]

said Caroline. "What is the name of that large bird, papa? He will
not hurt us, will he? I think he looks angry." "No, my darling!
he will not hurt you," replied her father; "it is a blue Macaw, a
larger species of Parrot. Like all foreign birds the plumage is more
vivid and brilliant than ours, but we have the advantage in song.
The Humming-bird is the smallest bird in the world, being little more
than three inches. The male is green and gold on the upper part, with
a changeable copper gloss; the under parts are grey. The throat and
fore part of the neck are a ruby colour, in some lights as bright
as fire. When viewed sideways, the feathers appear mixed with gold,
and beneath of a dull garnet colour. This beautiful little bird is
as admirable for its vast swiftness in the air, and its manner of
feeding, as for the elegance and brilliancy of its colours. Lightning
is scarcely more transient than its flight, nor the glare more vivid
than its colours. It never feeds but on the wing, suspended over the
flower from which it extracts its nourishment. If they find that any
of their brethren have been before them, they will, in a rage, if
possible, pluck it off and throw it on the ground, and sometimes even
tear it to pieces.

"Beautiful as is the plumage of the foreign birds, I give the
preference to our own. Who that ever heard the exquisite note of the
plain brown Nightingale would regret its want of brilliant plumage?
What can equal the melodious tones of the Robin, the mellow note of
the Linnet, the sweet call of the Blackbird, and numerous others
whose daily song seems to arise in grateful thankfulness to the
throne of the Creator. We have some birds, however, which may
almost vie with the beautiful plumage of the foreign species. The
Goldfinch, King's Fisher, Bullfinch, and various others, many of
which you have seen at your grandpapa's. The Pigeon and Dove, the
Peacock and Pheasant are extremely beautiful. Indeed, nothing in my
opinion can equal the splendour of the Peacock."

"From nature we will once more turn to art," said Mrs. Durnford,
"surely nothing of foreign manufacture can exceed the elegance and
design of that


                            ENGLISH CHINA.

                    [Illustration: _China Seller_]

Look at these flowers, how admirably they are formed, designed and
painted: where will you find a landscape more correctly executed,
more beautifully shaded than is to be seen on that flower vase."

"We have certainly arrived to great perfection, my dear," said Mr.
Durnford, "both in the manufacture of our China, and in the art of
painting it, but you must allow me to give the preference to that
which is imported from foreign states. Their earth is far superior
to ours, so are their colours. Shew me any of our own that can boast
the vivid glow of theirs. However we are greatly indebted to Mr.
Wedgewood, who was the first to introduce that superior sort of ware,
which for neatness and elegance is certainly unrivalled. Painting
upon China is become one of the fashionable amusements, like painting
upon velvet, but I trust that it will never become so common, as to
injure those who get their living by the produce of their industrious
exertions."

"Mamma," cried Theodore, "look at that lady who is bargaining for a
flaxen wig. How anxious she seems to have the opinion of the


                            HAIR MERCHANT,

                    [Illustration: _Hair Merchant_]

which will best suit her complexion. Where does all that hair come from
which is to be seen in the shops of the metropolis?"

"The dark hair is imported from Germany and France, while the beautiful
flaxen ringlets of various shades is brought over from the North. We
import a vast quantity, as our own country would afford us but little.
The hair of horses, besides many other purposes that it is applied to,
such as stuffing furniture and saddles, is woven into those coverings
for chairs and sofas, that are so durable and look like black satin.
Nay, I have seen very lately, the hair of a horse adorn the helmets of
our gallant warriors."

The next counter was occupied by a


                              SHOE MAKER,

                      [Illustration: _Shoe Maker_
    _Published Feb^y 1, 1815, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

where a genteel looking woman was trying on a pair of shoes for
her little baby. "Shoes," said Mr. Durnford, "are made of various
materials, such as satin, silk, stuff, kid, Spanish leather, seal
skin, and morocco. The latter comes from a place in Africa of that
name, but we imitate it ourselves, and not badly. The hide of cattle
serves for the soles. The silk you know is the produce of the
Southern climates, and comes from the silk worm. Vast quantities of
raw silk are imported here from Italy and different parts, as well
as velvet, of which again we have an imitation. You understand,
my children, that our imitations of foreign manufactures come
considerably lower than those which we import. Shoe making has also
become one of the amusements of the fashionable world, but it gives
me infinite pleasure to know that your mother has never adopted this
fashion, which, like many others must tend to injure the interests of
the industrious tradesman."

Their attention was now awakened by a violent scream, which proceeded
from a young lady, who, with her brother, was standing at the counter
of a


                              GUN SMITH.

                      [Illustration: _Gun Smith_]

The boy had thoughtlessly taken up a pistol and presented it at his
sister, who, terrified by the sight of so deadly a weapon aimed
against her breast, had uttered the piercing scream, which immediately
brought Mrs. Durnford and her family to her assistance. By degrees
they tranquillized the poor girl's mind, while Mr. Durnford strongly
reprobated the wanton levity of her brother.

"Surely, Sir," said the youth, "she must be extremely foolish not to
know that these things are never loaded when exposed to sale."

"That may be very true," said Mr. Durnford, "but so many accidents
occur hourly by the same thoughtless conduct as your own, that I am
surprised that any humane person can ever run the risk of wounding
either the feelings or the body of a fellow creature."

The young lady was now sufficiently recovered to thank Mrs. Durnford
for her kind attentions, and taking the arm of her thoughtless
brother, she quitted the Bazaar.

"Theodore," said Mr. Durnford, "can you remember when muskets were
first invented?"

"I think, papa, in the time of Henry the Eighth, when brass cannon were
first cast in England, as well as mortars. The finest steel is that of
Damascus in Asiatic Turkey."

"We import a vast quantity of swords and dirks from Germany likewise,"
said Mr. Durnford, "but as the implements of war are unpleasing objects
to the female mind, we will turn to a more agreeable subject, and take
a survey of those beautiful plants which are the pride of our


                            GREEN-HOUSES."

                  [Illustration: _Green House Plants_
    _Published Feb^y 1 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

"How lovely is the Illicium Floridanum with its large red flower!" said
Mrs. Durnford; "only smell how delicious is the perfume of its leaves."

"Delicious, indeed!" said Mr. Durnford, "I must purchase one on purpose
that I may enjoy the scent. It comes from Florida. I must also treat
myself with one of those Camellia Japonica, or Japan roses. The blossom
is uncommonly fine. Pray what is the name of this tall flower?"

"The Lobelia Fulgens," replied the proprietor. "It is a native of North
America, and is a hardy plant."

"I should like that pot of China roses, mamma," said Emily; "they came
originally, I believe, from China, and are called Rosasinensis."

"That mignonette is very luxuriant," said Maria, "pray have some,
mamma, the smell is so fragrant. Do they not call it Resecla Odorata."

"Yes, my love, and it came first from Egypt."

"Oh, mamma; do buy that sweet myrtle," cried Caroline, "I am so fond of
myrtles and geraniums. What is the Latin term for myrtle?"

"There are eleven different sorts, my dear;" said her mother, "the
common myrtle is a native of the South of Europe, and is called Myrtus
Communis. Many come from the West India Islands, and some from
Asia. In the Isle of Wight we have hedges of them, and in the South
of England they will grow in the open air, as well as some of the
geraniums, of which latter there are too many for me to enumerate. How
lovely is the Convallaria Majalis, or lilly of the valley. It is a
simple flower, a native of Britain, but the perfume is delightful."

From the Florist, they now turned towards the


                               MILLINER,

                      [Illustration: _Milliner_]

where little Caroline again saw something to excite her laughter, and
to call forth the smile of her father. A lady, long past the prime of
life, but dressed in a style of girlish fashion, with short sleeves
which shewed her shrivelled arms, and still shorter petticoats, was
viewing herself with much complacency, as she placed on her head,
the grey hairs of which were concealed by the flowing tresses of an
auburn wig, a large straw hat, loaded with flowers and feathers, and
only fit for a young woman under thirty.

"Surely, mamma," cried Emily, "that old lady can never intend to buy
that hat? It is too gay for one of her years."

"She certainly does," said Maria, "and I dare say believes that it will
make her look twenty years younger than she is."

"She thinks wrong then, sister," exclaimed Theodore. "For, unless she
can hide the wrinkles in her face and neck, and the loss of her teeth,
and the leanness of her body, she will only the more expose her age, by
dressing so ridiculously."

"Your remark is a just one, my boy," said his father. "Old age of
itself is respectable, and calls for the attention and veneration of
youth, but when it apes the dress and follies of the latter, it only
excites the sneer of contempt, and the laugh of ridicule."

"From contemplating the weakness of the human mind," said Mrs.
Durnford, "let us now turn towards that which has the power of
strengthening and invigorating the human body. What would our
physicians and other medical gentlemen do, without the aid of the


                         CHEMIST AND DRUGGIST.

                 [Illustration: _Chemist & Druggist_]

The physician writes his prescription, and it is then sent to the shop
of the druggist, who makes it up according to the order. Several of
their medicines are rendered expensive, by having musk, camphire, and
other dear articles introduced in them. Apothecaries Hall is the best
place to buy drugs, for they never vend any that are not genuine."

"Drugs are composed of minerals as well as vegetables, are they not,
papa?" said Theodore.

"Yes, my dear boy. But do you perfectly comprehend what is a mineral?"

"A mineral, papa, is a semi-metal, as they are called by the chemists,
such as antimony, zinc, bismuth, and others. They are not inflammable,
but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced into powder. Mercury or
quicksilver has been classed with semi-metals. Shall I tell you how
many metals there are, papa?"

"If you please Theodore."

"There are six, papa. Gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, and iron. The
most precious metals, such as gold and silver, do not form the most
splendid ones. The pyrites, which are a mixture of iron and sulphur,
are more beautiful to the eye."

"Very well remembered, Theodore. But you forget to class the magnet as
a mineral."

"I do not perfectly understand the nature of the magnet, papa."

"It is a species of Iron found in iron mines," said Mr. Durnford,
"which has the singular property of attracting metal. The ancients
knew no means of finding their way at sea, but by the stars; of
course when those celestial bodies were not visible, the sailor was
frequently at a loss how to steer. A piece of steel is now procured,
made something like a needle, but flat, about four inches long; this
is rubbed with the loadstone, and then balanced exactly on two points
or pivots, so that it may turn round freely. This needle when
fixed in a box, is called the mariner's compass, and as it invariably
turns toward the North, the sailors can now steer to any part of the
world, which they could not do without the help of this piece of
iron. The first knowledge of this useful application of the magnet
is supposed to come from Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the thirteenth
century; but it is said to have been known to the Chinese."

"We will now take a view of those


                               PRINTS,"

                    [Illustration: _Print-seller_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "I am as fond of the sight as any of my children."

"A fine engraving is very valuable," replied Mr. Durnford, "and I
have lately seen some on wood, which pleased me extremely. Albert
Durer, was I believe the first inventor of engraving on wood. Etching
on copper was not known until Henry the Sixth's time."

"What is that picture, papa, which that lady has just turned aside?"
enquired Miss Durnford.

"It is the representation of one of the most important events in
English history, my love. Namely, the signing of a deed called Magna
Charta, by the weak-minded and worthless King John. The place is
called Runnymead, near Windsor; where the barons compelled John to
sign that famous deed, which laid the foundation of that freedom,
which for centuries has been the glory, boast, and security, of the
English people. I will buy the print, that I may have the pleasure of
placing underneath it, those fine lines by Dr. Akenside, which were
intended for a pillar or monument of that transaction at Runnymead."

After they were written, Mr. Durnford desired Theodore to read them,
which he did in a voice and manner so truly admirable, that several
present stood listening with delight, while their bosoms proudly
swelled at the recollection of those blessings, which as Englishmen
they were privileged to enjoy.

  "Thou who the verdant plain dost traverse here,
  "While Thames among his willows from thy view
  "Retires, O stranger! stay thee, and the scene
  "Around contemplate well.--This is the place
  "Where England's ancient Barons, clad in arms
  "And stern with conquest, from their tyrant king
  "(Then rendered tame) did challenge and secure
  "The charter of their freedom.--Pass not on
  "Till thou hast bless'd their memory, and paid
  "Those thanks which God appointed the reward
  "Of public virtue.--And if chance thy home
  "Salute thee with a father's honoured name,
  "Go call thy sons, instruct them what a debt
  "They owe their ancestors; and make them swear
  "To pay it, by transmitting down entire
  "Those sacred rights to which themselves were born."

The young people now stopped to admire a collection of


                             FANCY WORKS,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

some of which were useful, others only ornamental, but as it
gave employment to the young and to the industrious, Mrs. Durnford
generously determined to encourage the art by purchasing several
of the prettiest articles, such as flower cases, card racks, hand
screens, all of which were made of paper, highly ornamented with
gold, and elegant little painted devices. Her daughters had been
taught a variety of fancy works by their governess, but their mamma
felt a pleasure in purchasing these, because she trusted that she
was doing good, as well as assisting to support some worthy object
in distress. Upon learning from the young person who sold them, that
this was really the case, she ordered her children to make choice
of what they pleased, and then hastened forward to avoid the warm
effusions of gratitude, which her liberality had called forth.

The attention of the young ladies was now divided between some
remarkable fine figs which they saw displayed at a


                               GROCER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Grocer_]

and a short vulgar looking female, who with a sharp turned up nose,
pointed chin, and staring eyes, was watching the woman as she weighed
the tea, lest she should fail to give her the turn of the scale.

"Caroline," said Mr. Durnford, who saw his little girl endeavouring
to repress her laughter, "can you tell me from what country tea is
imported?"

"From China, papa, and first used in England in the reign of Charles
the First. Sugar comes from the West India Islands, and coffee from
Turkey."

"You are a good girl, Caroline, for remembering what your governess has
taught you. Tell me where figs come from, and you shall have some of
those which look so fine."

"I think it is Turkey, papa, as well as our best raisins. Malaga
raisins from Spain, and currants, which I am so fond of in a pudding,
come from the islands in the Mediterranean."

Caroline now received the reward of her memory which she generously
divided among her sisters and Theodore.

"Remember, my little darling," said Mrs. Durnford, "that rice, of
which you are also very fond, comes from Asia. Tamarinds and other
preserved fruits from the West Indies, and spices from the Molucca or
Spice Islands. Almonds and dates are imported from Africa, as well as
a variety of other commodities not sold by the grocer."

"Now, Maria," said Mr. Durnford, "I must tax your memory a little. Let
us take a look at those comfortable articles of winter clothing which
are exposed for sale by the


                               FURRIER."

                      [Illustration: _Furrier_]

"I understand you, papa, and will try to recollect. I know that it is
to the northern countries that we are indebted for our furs. The
ermine, whose beautiful white fur and black tail lines the coronets
and mantles of our nobles, creeps among the snows of Siberia, and the
north of Russia. There too is the sable, whose fur is so dear, that
I think you once told me, a robe lined with it, is often valued at
a thousand pounds. We also import furs from America, and I believe
frequently make use of that belonging to the pretty innocent rabbit,
and the graceful cat, to line our muffs and shoes."

"They suffer alike with the faithful dog, my dear," said her father,
"as well as other animals who are killed for our use. In the northern
regions the natives could not stir from their homes, unless they
were shielded from the severity of the weather, by lining their
clothes with fur. Even in England, the gentlemen feel the comforts of
fur on their great coats, and the ladies enjoy the benefit of their
muffs and tippets, although our winter is not to be compared with
that of other countries."

"Mamma! mamma!" cried Caroline, "there is the very same old lady
looking at that beautiful crape dress, at the


                           DRESS MAKER'S,

                    [Illustration: _Dress Maker_]

who was trying on the large straw hat with such a profusion of feathers
and flowers."

"Hush! my lovely girl," said her mamma, "if you are not more silent
I must take you home."

"It is just the thing, Mrs. Tasteful," screamed out the old lady. "It
will suit my figure exactly. Square bosom, and off the shoulders,
why with a lace frill I shall look delightful. A saucy fellow had
the impudence to tell me, as I was getting out of my carriage, that
I had better wear my petticoat a little longer to hide my legs, and
put a shawl on to conceal my neck. The fool had no more taste than
a Hottentot. Well, my dear woman, you will let me have this dress
immediately. I am going out to a ball this evening, and shall want to
put it on. Primrose coloured crape over white sarsenet. Charming, I
declare!"

"Come on, my dears," said Mr. Durnford, hastily, "I have no inclination
to listen any longer to such disgusting vanity and folly. The age of
that lady ought to have enabled her to set good examples to the younger
and inexperienced part of her sex, instead of which she is only a
disgrace to it. Come on, my dears, I will not stay a moment longer,
lest another burst of weakness should offend my ear. You all know what
is the province of a dress maker, therefore it requires no
explanation."

"I am in want of some hair-brushes," said Mrs. Durnford, "therefore if
you please we must stop a few minutes at the


                            BRUSH MAKER'S."

                     [Illustration: _Brush Maker_]

"That gentleman seems afraid of taking the nap off his coat, papa,"
said Theodore, smilingly. "Did you not tell me that brushes were made
of hog's bristles?"

"Yes, and we import them from Russia in vast quantities. There is a
great art in brush making, for if not done by a good workman, the
bristles will fall out, before the brush is half worn out."

"Now for the


                             BOOKSELLER,"

                      [Illustration: _Bookseller_
   _Published Feb^y. 20, 1818, by J. Harris, corner of S^t. Pauls._]

cried Theodore, with delight, as his eyes rested upon a parcel of books
neatly bound, which were placed on the next counter.

"I have no objection to your selecting one book a-piece," said his
father, "but you remember, Theodore, that I always make a point of
buying all your books at the corner of St. Paul's Church-yard. You may,
however, purchase a few of this person, who appears to have got a very
good selection."

"I had them, Sir, of Mr. Harris, in St. Paul's Church-yard," said the
woman. "He was so good as to choose for me what he thought would sell
best."

"Then you may look over them, my dears," said Mr. Durnford. "I suppose,
Caroline, that you know what paper is made from?"

"Of linen rags, papa, but I do not know how it is made."

"No, my love, neither can I explain it to you now, as the process is
too long. Theodore, can you inform me of the origin of printing."

"Coining, and taking impressions in wax, are of great antiquity," said
Theodore, "and the principle is precisely the same as that of printing.
The application of this principle to the multiplication of books,
constituted the discovery of the art of printing. The Chinese have for
many ages printed with blocks, or whole pages engraved on wood; but
the application of single letters or moveable types, forms the merit
and the superiority of the European art. The honour of giving rise
to this method, has been claimed by the cities of Harlem, Mentz, and
Strasburg; and to each of these it may be ascribed in some degree, as
printers resident in each, made improvements in the art."

"So far you are right, my dear boy," said his father, "it is recorded,
that one Laurentius, of Harlem, was the first inventor of the leaden
letters, which he afterwards changed for a mixture of tin and lead, as
a more solid and durable substance. We may suppose this to have been
about 1430. From this period, printing made a rapid progress in most of
the chief towns of Europe. In 1490 it reached Constantinople, and was
extended by the middle of the following century, to Africa and America.
It was for a long time believed that printing was introduced into
England, by one William Caxton, a mercer, and citizen of London, who
having resided many years in Holland, Flanders, and Germany, had made
himself master of the whole art, and set up a press in Westminster, in
1471. But a book has since been found, with a date of its impression at
Oxford, in 1468, and is considered as a proof that printing began in
that University before Caxton practised it in London. Emily, what have
you got there bound so handsomely in morocco?"

"Mrs. Chapone's Letters, papa, it is a present from mamma. And Maria
has got European Scenes, for Tarry at Home Travellers, a very pretty
book, full of engravings. And Caroline has chosen Keeper's Travels in
Search of his Master."

"Very well, my dear, and here is Sandford and Merton for our Theodore,
half-bound in Russia. This leather is now made use of in libraries,
because it preserves the books from the moth, the smell, perhaps, is
not so agreeable. Other books are bound in calves' skin, which is a
very pretty binding, and others are only half-bound, as it is called,
or in boards. Now, if you are suited, we will pass on to the


                             WATCH MAKER."

                    [Illustration: _Watch Maker_]

"The invention of clocks," said Mr. Durnford, "is to be ascribed to
the Saracens, to whom we are indebted for most of our mathematical
sciences. Hubert, Prince of Carrara, caused the first clock that
ever was _publicly_ erected to be put up at Padua, as they had hitherto
been shut up in Monasteries. Towards the end of the fifteenth century,
clocks began to be in use among private persons. Watches were used in
London, in the reign of Henry the Eighth. Dante, the celebrated Italian
poet, was the first Author who mentions a clock that struck the hour.
But the use of clocks was not confined to Italy at this period; for we
had an artist in England, who furnished the famous clock house, near
Westminster Hall, with a clock to be heard by the courts of law, in
1288. Before this invention was generally known, sun dials and hour
glasses were used. The Elector of Saxony had a clock set in the pummel
of his saddle, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had a watch set as
a jewel, in a ring. Nothing can equal the perfection to which this
species of mechanism is now carried. I have half a mind, Theodore, to
treat you to a watch, for you have deserved one by your attention to
your studies, and our poor watch-maker looks so woe begone, that I fear
he has not sold one to-day. Examine this plain gold hunting watch, and
tell me if you like it."

Theodore was in raptures with it, as he had long sighed to possess a
watch. "Tell me in what country the gold which composes the case of
this watch is to be found," said his father.

"The Mines of Chili and Peru, in America, are the richest, papa,"
replied Theodore, "but very fine gold is found in some parts of the
East Indies. Gold dust is found on the coast of Guinea, in Africa, and
hence the name of our largest gold coin. Silver Mines are in all parts
of the world, but those of Potosi in Peru, and some others in America,
are the most productive. All the precious stones, which so frequently
enrich the backs and fronts of our watches, come also from America, and
Cornelian stones, of which seals are made."

Mr. Durnford, highly delighted with his son, now made him a present of
a gold watch and seals, one of which he ordered to be engraved with
his name. They next proceeded to the


                             FRUITERER'S,

                      [Illustration: _Fruiterer_]

where the children were desired to take what they liked best.

"All our fruits originally came from abroad," said Mr. Durnford, "but
we have improved upon them, although our climate is not sufficiently
warm to bring them to that perfection, which is the boast of the
Southern nations. The pineapple, which you know is a most delicious
fruit, comes from the West Indies, but we have excellent pineries in
England, as well as fine melons. They also are natives of both the
Indies. Our finest pears are from France, oranges, nuts, almonds,
olives, grapes, chestnuts, pomegranates, lemons, and prunes, all come
from the South of Europe. Oranges originally came from China. We do not
know the real flavour of an orange in this country, as they are pulled
long before they are ripe, and sent over here to be purchased by the
fruit merchants. Some of these look very good, therefore we will buy
some. Caroline, open your basket, and take some of these grapes, and a
few pears."

"Yes, dear papa," cried the little girl, "only pray let me look at that
old gouty farmer, who is buying at


                             THE HOSIER'S,

                       [Illustration: _Hosier_]

those nice warm stockings. What are they called, papa, I have seen
them at my grandfather's."

"They are called Lambs'-wool stockings, my dear, and are particularly
serviceable to the aged and infirm. The old gentleman looks as if he
was reckoning up his money, that he may know whether his purse will
allow of his indulging himself with more than one pair of his favourite
Lambs'-wool stockings. Let us look at some white silk.--Silk you know
is imported from Italy, it is produced by a worm which feeds on the
leaves of the mulberry-tree. Cotton is imported from Asia, of which
we make our fine cotton stockings. The wool of sheep supplies us with
worsted stockings, the chief wear of the working classes of men, and
the skins of animals give us that necessary finish to our dress,
gloves. The best and handsomest of this latter article are made in
France, but are prohibited from being sold in England, that they may
not injure our own manufactures."

"Let us now examine the beauties of the


                              SCULPTOR,"

                      [Illustration: _Sculptor_]

said Mrs. Durnford, "the imitative arts of sculpture and painting, made
an early appearance in Greece. Statuary, a more simple imitation than
painting, was soonest brought to perfection: the statues of Jupiter
by Phidias, and of Juno by Polycletes, were executed long before the
art of light and shade was known. Another cause likewise concurred to
advance statuary before painting, namely, the great demand for statues
of the gods. In all countries where the people are barbarous and
illiterate, the progress of the arts is extremely slow. Fine arts are
also precarious; they are not relished but by persons of taste, who are
comparatively very few; for which reason, they will never flourish in
any country, unless patronized by the Sovereign, or by men of power and
opulence. Our own cathedrals can boast some beautiful specimens of this
art, among which the works of Bacon and of Flaxman stand conspicuous.
Look, Caroline, at this figure, can you tell me who it is meant to
represent?"

Caroline thought it was Mercury, "but what does he hold in his hand,
mamma?"

"A caduceus, or wand, my dear, round which are entwined two serpents.
Mercury is the god of eloquence, of arts and sciences, and the
messenger of Jupiter. When you are a little older, you must learn
the history of the Heathen gods and goddesses, else you will remain
ignorant of many beautiful allusions in poetry. They are introduced
likewise into painting, of which I shall be happy, my Theodore, if you
can give me some account."

"It is said to have had its rise among the Egyptians," said Theodore,
"but the Greeks, who learned it of them, carried it to the summit of
perfection, if we may believe the stories related of their Apelles
and Zeuxis. The Romans, in the latter times of the Republic, and under
the first emperors, were not without considerable masters in the art;
but the inundation of barbarians which deluged Italy, proved fatal to
the arts, and almost reduced painting to its first elements. It was
in Italy, however, that painting returned to its ancient honour, when
Cimaluce, born at Florence, transferred the poor remains of the art
from a Greek painter into his own country."

"You are right, my dear boy," said his father, "he was seconded in his
attempts by other Florentines. The first who gained any reputation,
were Ghirlaudias, Michael Angelo's master; Pietro Perugino, the master
of Raphael Urbino; and Andrea Verocchio, the teacher of Leonardo da
Vinci. Michael Angelo founded the School of Florence; Raphael that of
Rome, and Leonardo da Vinci, the School of Milan; to which I may add,
the Lombard School under Georgione and Titian. France also has given
birth to some eminent painters, as Poussin, Lebrun, David, and others,
and our own country, during the last century, has been distinguished
by artists, such as Reynolds, Hogarth, West, Barry, Wilson, Morland,
Gainsborough, and many others. At the exhibition at Somerset House,
you will see a fine collection of paintings, and models of Sculpture,
besides a variety of miniature pictures, which are very beautiful. And
now, my dear children, I think we have seen all the contents of the
Bazaar, which I hope has amused as well as instructed you."

The young people all expressed their thanks to their kind parents
for the entertainment they had received, as well from the curious
characters which they had seen drawn together by the same motives, as
from the inspection of the various articles which the neat and elegant
little shops contained.

"I think we could not have spent a morning better," said Mrs. Durnford,
"and since we are all of the same opinion we will now return home to
dinner, perfectly well satisfied with The Visit to the Bazaar."


                                FINIS.


        H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VISIT TO THE BAZAAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

 You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.